All of us, I am sure, know these two words.
Should. And Must. And, I think most of us,
till today, we have been using that quite
interchangeably. Only a slight difference
between the two. For example… Should — I
should watch the Vikram movie. It is a good
idea to watch it. But, Must? It is a duty.
It is a rule. It is going to be disadvantageous
if I don’t follow it. I must take an umbrella.
For it is raining. Should. Must. Not too much
of a difference to write home about. Yes?
So, we SHOULD go. It is getting late.. You
SHOULD watch the Game of Thrones. You MUST
have a passport to travel. You MUST be on
time for the exam. These two words.. The nuanced
difference between the meanings of these two
words.. A lady has written a book on it. And,
that’s what we are going to see today! A
full book!
Namaste! Four hundred and fifteen! Should
we do it? Must we do it? Let’s anyway get
in.
This is the name of that book. The Crossroads
of Should and Must. Find and Follow your Passion.
That’s what this book is about. I fell in
love with everything about the book. Right
from the cover art. So, who is she? Her name
is Elle Luna… and, great orator. Inspirational,
truly. Artist. Amazing! She’s even good-looking!
May even slip in as a Kollywood actor! And,
look at her signature! I loved even her signature!
Like four Ls next to each other. E. L. L.
E. Elle Luna. She was an artist who went through
a slump in her career. And, she had a recurrent
dream. A room is featured in that room. And,
she goes in search of that room. That’s
what this book is about. Should and Must.
These two are quite different from each other.
In her dictionary at least.
Right in the first few pages of the book itself,
you encounter this. “It’s permission to
UNLEARN everything you’ve ever been told
you SHOULD do, in order to LEARN what you
MUST!” Immediately bulbs started going off
in my mind.. For, just yesterday, we had seen
the Unlearn — Relearn cycle of Learning,
didn’t we?! So, I decided to jump in, immediately.
She starts by telling, first, take a pulse
check. Where are you!? If you are doing a
Job, you are on a nine to five chase. You
come. You go. You do work. You get paid. That’s
what you are in. Some of you may be in the
Career-zone. In the Career-zone, you are improving
every day. You are learning a little more.
You are creating opportunities for yourself.
I am getting better at what I do. And, I progress
step by step. Like the LinkedIn logo conveys.
But, there’s a third word which is probably
a lot more important, and that, is your Calling.
Your purpose. That famous Ikigai. The reason
you think you’ve been put on earth for.
They call it “The World’s Expert in Being
Me”.. Who am I? I am the world’s expert
in being me! So, like that, are you in that
kind of zone? That is Walt Disney’s card?
Where did his career stop and where did his
life start? No! He didn’t do work. His life
WAS his work! My life is my message, said
Mahatma Gandhi. Are you in that zone? Are
you doing a Job? Are you pursuing a Career?
Or, are you living your Calling? Get that
sorted out first.
For, this Should-dilemma… I have to do it.
I have been asked to do it. It is my responsibility.
It has become my duty. All those are Shoulds.
I should. I should be there ten o clock. My
class starts. My work starts. I shouldn’t
do that. The society prevents me. There is
such a din made by these Shoulds. But, the
Must? It stays alone, showing one direction,
weakly, but ringing in your brain constantly,
that is your personal motive force — that’s
the must. And, what should your life goal
be? Blow all the Shoulds away. Pursue the
single bright Must that is still standing.
You Must chase it. You Should drop the Shoulds,
you Must chase the Must.
This person resembles the villain from the
Aadukalam movie! But, I hear his name is Gurdjieff.
This Turkish saint called Gurdjieff… the
Sadguru calls him the Rascal Saint, go check
it out on YouTube… The Rascal Saint. He
comes up with a beautiful philosophical koan.
He asks his disciples, his followers, this
interesting question. “A person gets jailed.
What should he do first, to successfully come
out of jail?” Very interesting answers come
out. One of them says his first task should
be to test the strength of the metal bars.
Another says testing the soil for firmness
might be a good idea. Another proposes that
he should first try and understand what kind
of key will open the lock. And, what about
befriending the jailor who oversees the prison?
And so on and on, they pour forth their ideas.
But, Gurdjieff says, the first thing a person
who is imprisoned in a jail should do, so
that he stands a chance to come out of the
jail is to realise he is imprisoned! He has
to internalise the thought that he is stuck
inside a prison, and only afterwards, everything
else follows! If you don’t even realise
you are in a jail, of a job, of a career,
you can’t pursue your calling.
Remember? We saw the Shoulds? I am sure each
of you would have been in situations like
these. I have been. You should never _______.
You should always ________. You should know
better than to ________. You should not _________.
These are things that we have heard, from
when we were tiny tots, … all the way till
yesterday, we keep hearing these sentences.
What others place on us as expectations. So,
Elle Luna, the author, she says, “I also
faced those. But, one day, I started asking
questions. I wrote them all down, these Shoulds,
in pieces of paper. I put them all up on the
wall. And then, I started asking, boldly,
frankly, but respectfully… I asked three
questions.”
“Where did you come from? Where did you
begin? Why did you choose me? Whose arrow
is this, that is coming towards me? Who did
you think I was, when you chose to come to
me? Where did you come from?” These Shoulds?
They would run away from you the moment they
hear you asking these questions, the author
says.
Here is another question. “Are you still
true for me? You came to me thinking I was
somebody. But, I am changing! I have become
somebody else? Are you still true for me?
Are we a right match? I have changed. There
was another guy that came with you, yesterday,
and I changed because of it. Am I still relevant
for you? Are you still true for me? Will you
be true?”
And then, the third question. “Do I want
to keep holding on to you?” A little child
hangs on tightly to ANYTHING that even LOOKS
like a finger. I don’t know why. There is
that reflex reaction. A sense of belonging
perhaps. A sense of safety and security. But,
one day the child realises, “Why am I holding
on to you!? Force of habit? Wait!” Only
when it releases the hold, only when the unlearning
happens, you realise that it is an unnecessary
Should. You realise it is an irrelevant Should.
And that’s when the doors open for Must.
Can you tell me her name? Yes! Marie Kondo.
This Marie Kondo, a Japanese woman, truly
inspiring, has authored many books, has even
run a TV series, all about the concept of
how to get rid of junk, and how to create
cleanliness and neatness at the home, at the
office. The Kon Mari method, people call it.
She made famous, an interesting phrase called
“Spark Joy”. You have a thing in your
hand. You have had it for ages. You see it
again. It is occupying space. It is wasting
your time. But, you haven’t thrown it away.
Throw it away, she says. But, before throwing
it away, hold it in your hand, she suggests.
“Appreciate it. And then, look inwards.
Do you feel the spark of joy? Does it spark
joy?” Look at her pose! She would be standing
like that, still. Body all keyed up. And,
it would swell up and … a “Ting”…
There is even a video of her acting it out
on YouTube! The resonant power surging through
your body.. You feel good about it. Is that
the feeling you get? If it doesn’t spark
joy, whether it be because of nostalgia, or
because of its productive value, or because
of its daily utility value, whatever, does
it spark joy? If it doesn’t, place it in
front of you, thank it. Thank it for traveling
along the way till now. Forgive me. I am gonna
bid good bye now. That is how you let it go.
And she says, we should be choosing what we
want to hold on to! Not what we want to get
rid of! Throw everything off! And, as they
are receding in the horizon, spot one and
ask it to come back, spot another and request
it to be retained! Bid the others good bye!
Be choosy about what you want to retain! The
Kon Mari method. And, I would like to draw
a connection between this Kon Mari method
and the Should-Must that Elle Luna talks about.
We could use the Kon Mari method to get rid
of our Shoulds!
She talks about four reasons that will stand
in front of you, preventing you from pursuing
your Must. You have thrown the Shoulds away.
The Must is staring you in your face. But,
how do you completely dedicate yourself to
the identified Must? What will the obstacles
be? Number one, is of course Money. She refers
to it from a Western standpoint. But, I think
it is relevant everywhere. She talks about
“Need to have” Money and “Nice to have”
Money. There is a limit below which you will
be financially destroyed! Unsustainable! And,
there is a limit above which it is okay if
you don’t get more. Try to be between these
two. Don’t cross those boundaries. As far
as it involves Money, first finalise this,
and then go in pursuit of your Must.
The second thing she talks about as an obstacle
is Time. “I have no time at all”. “I
will get around to doing it after I retire”.
“I will do this after my children grow up”.
These are akin to saying, I will do it after
the waves in the seashore die down! For Luna,
do you know when she decided to suddenly quit
her Silicon Valley designer job and become
a freelance artist and author? She used to
live in this room. She had set up some videos
and cameras as part of her studio design.
To take timelapse photos, etc. One day, by
chance, she had come back from work, and the
camera was silently operating. She looks around,
takes in the room, there is the dog that does
what dogs do to their masters, and then she
picks up her brushes, paint, and starts painting.
In the window in the background, one could
see the sunlight slowly failing, growing dark,
and she is still painting. It is night. The
moon is up. She is still painting. And then,
that timelapse continues into the morning.
And she stretches herself. Yawns. And she
is still painting. And then, she picks up
her bag, and walks out to her office. Only
a few days later, when reviewing the videos,
she realises that there is a video shot like
this. She didn’t even realise this had happened.
She had been in Flow. When she realised she
had done it for one full night, without sleep,
without food, without any other distractions,
that is when she realises “Oh my god, I
need to dedicate more time for this!” and
the next day, she quits her job! So, create
time, even if it is ten minutes a day.., “What
did you do to serve your Must, today?” “What
food did you feed its infinite hunger?”
That should be the question you should ask
yourself every day.
The third, of course, if there is a question
of Time, there is the question of Space too!
I don’t have space in my home! I don’t
have an audio/video studio. I don’t have
a playground to pursue my game. I don’t
have a library shelf to put all the books
that I want to read. The space… But, Elle
says, the problem of Space is less OUTSIDE
of you and more INSIDE of you! First, get
rid of all the things around you that you
retain because you want to do this, you want
to do that, and you want to do everything
else too! First get rid of those! Just as
you throw them out, right along with that
act, you will get space automatically created!
Try it!
And, finally, the fourth obstacle that will
stand in front of you, surely, is the Fear
of Failure. That monster that chases you,
every time you want to perform, every time
you want to attempt something that you haven’t
done before, what will people say, will they
laugh, will the people who love you stop loving
you, these are the monsters that will chase
you! And, she has a quote to share in that
context. Somebody once said, somebody famous
once said, “Fear kills more dreams than
failure ever will”. It is the FEAR factor
that leads to failure. It is not Failure that
leads us to the feeling of Fear. There are
too many, countless initiatives that are stopped
simply because of this Fear of Failure. The
Englishmen have a word for this. They coin
words for everything, don’t they!? Fear
of Failure has a word for it. Atychiphobia.
I am not going to teach you the pronunciation.
For the original pronunciation is different,
and you can go on the internet to get it.
But, the first time I saw this word, after
I had just finished the book by Elle Luna,
I told myself, I want to pronounce this word
like this! அட சீ போவியா!
When that demon, the fear-of-failure demon
approaches me, that is how I want to pronounce
that word!
Anyway, for the closing thought, I would like
to close with a quote from that book. She
says, “There are Shoulds. And there is the
Must. Have you found your Must? Great! From
now on, the Should road, the Could road, the
One-Day road, the Someday road, should only
ever be taken in moderation, and on your way
to the Must road.” That thin straight road,
the Must road, .. is the important one. The
others are like little pitstops along the
way. Coffee points to perhaps occasionally
stop and have a sip. I would love to have
a cuppa with her! Let’s see what happens!
Thank you! Later today, we will be meeting,
for Four Hundred and Sixteen! Thank you!